README.md, before:

![Tabular API](banner.png)

# Tabular API

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/datagouv/api-tabular.svg?style=svg)](https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/datagouv/api-tabular)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

An API service that provides RESTful access to CSV or tabular data converted by [Hydra](https://github.com/datagouv/hydra). This service provides a REST API to access PostgreSQL database tables containing CSV data, offering HTTP querying capabilities, pagination, and data streaming for CSV or tabular resources.

This service is mainly used, developed and maintained by [data.gouv.fr](https://data.gouv.fr) - the France Open Data platform.
The production API is deployed on data.gouv.fr infrastructure at [`https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api`](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api). See the [product documentation](https://www.data.gouv.fr/dataservices/api-tabulaire-data-gouv-fr-beta/) (in French) for usage details and the [technical documentation](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api/doc) for API reference.

## 🛠️ Installation & Setup

### 📋 Requirements

- **Python** >= 3.11, < 3.14
- **[uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)** for dependency management
- **Docker & Docker Compose**

### 🧪 Run with a test database

1. **Start the Infrastructure**

   Start the test CSV database and test PostgREST container:
   ```shell
   docker compose --profile test up -d
   ```
   The `--profile test` flag tells Docker Compose to start the PostgREST and PostgreSQL services for the test CSV database. This starts PostgREST on port 8080, connecting to the test CSV database. You can access the raw PostgREST API on http://localhost:8080.

2. **Launch the main API proxy**

   Install dependencies and start the proxy services:
   ```shell
   uv sync
   uv run adev runserver -p8005 api_tabular/tabular/app.py    # Api related to apified CSV files by udata-hydra (dev server)
   uv run adev runserver -p8006 api_tabular/metrics/app.py    # Api related to udata's metrics (dev server)
   ```

   **Note:** For production, use gunicorn with aiohttp worker:
   ```shell
   # Tabular API (port 8005)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.tabular.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8005 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -

   # Metrics API (port 8006)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.metrics.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8006 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -
   ```

   The main API provides a controlled layer over PostgREST - exposing PostgREST directly would be too permissive, so this adds a security and access control layer.

3. **Test the API**

   Query the API using a `resource_id`. Several test resources are available in the fake database:

   - **`aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc`** - Main test resource with 1000 rows
   - **`aaaaaaaa-5555-bbbb-6666-cccccccccccc`** - Resource with database indexes
   - **`dddddddd-7777-eeee-8888-ffffffffffff`** - Resource allowed for aggregation
   - **`aaaaaaaa-9999-bbbb-1010-cccccccccccc`** - Resource with indexes and aggregation allowed

### 🏭 Run with a real Hydra database

To use the API with a real database served by [Hydra](https://github.com/datagouv/hydra) instead of the fake test database:

1. **Start the real Hydra CSV database locally:**

   First, you need to have Hydra CSV database running locally. See the [Hydra repository](https://github.com/datagouv/hydra) for instructions on how to set it up. Make sure the Hydra CSV database is accessible on `localhost:5434`.

2. **Start PostgREST pointing to your local Hydra database:**
   ```shell
   docker compose --profile hydra up -d
   ```
   The `--profile hydra` flag tells Docker Compose to start the PostgREST service configured for a local real Hydra CSV database (instead of the test one provided by the docker compose in this repo). By default, this starts PostgREST on port 8080. You can customize the port using the `PGREST_PORT` environment variable:
   ```shell
   # Use default port 8080
   docker compose --profile hydra up -d

   # Use custom port (e.g., 8081)
   PGREST_PORT=8081 docker compose --profile hydra up -d
   ```

3. **Configure the API to use it:**
   ```shell
   # If using default port 8080
   export PGREST_ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8080"

   # If using custom port (e.g., 8081)
   export PGREST_ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8081"
   ```

4. **Start the API services:**
   ```shell
   uv sync
   uv run adev runserver -p8005 api_tabular/tabular/app.py     # Dev server
   uv run adev runserver -p8006 api_tabular/metrics/app.py     # Dev server
   ```

   **Note:** For production, use gunicorn with aiohttp worker:
   ```shell
   # Tabular API (port 8005)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.tabular.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8005 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -

   # Metrics API (port 8006)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.metrics.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8006 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -
   ```

5. **Use real resource IDs** from your Hydra database instead of the test IDs.

**Note:** Make sure your Hydra CSV database is accessible and the database schema matches the expected structure. The test database uses the `csvapi` schema, while real Hydra databases typically use the `public` schema.


## 📚 API Documentation

### Resource Endpoints

#### Get Resource Metadata
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/
```

Returns basic information about the resource including creation date, URL, and available endpoints.

**Example:**
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "created_at": "2023-04-21T22:54:22.043492+00:00",
  "url": "https://data.gouv.fr/datasets/example/resources/fake.csv",
  "links": [
    {
      "href": "/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/",
      "type": "GET",
      "rel": "profile"
    },
    {
      "href": "/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/",
      "type": "GET",
      "rel": "data"
    },
    {
      "href": "/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/swagger/",
      "type": "GET",
      "rel": "swagger"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Get Resource Profile
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/profile/
```

Returns the CSV profile information (column types, headers, etc.) generated by [csv-detective](https://github.com/datagouv/csv-detective).

**Example:**
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "profile": {
    "header": [
        "id",
        "score",
        "decompte",
        "is_true",
        "birth",
        "liste"
    ]
  },
  "...": "..."
}
```

#### Get Resource Data
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/data/
```

Returns the actual data with support for filtering, sorting, and pagination.

**Example:**
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "data": [
    {
        "__id": 1,
        "id": " 8c7a6452-9295-4db2-b692-34104574fded",
        "score": 0.708,
        "decompte": 90,
        "is_true": false,
        "birth": "1949-07-16",
        "liste": "[0]"
    },
    ...
  ],
  "links": {
      "profile": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/",
      "swagger": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/swagger/",
      "next": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?page=2&page_size=20",
      "prev": null
  },
  "meta": {
      "page": 1,
      "page_size": 20,
      "total": 1000
  }
}
```

#### Get Resource Data as CSV
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/data/csv/
```

Streams the data directly as a CSV file for download.

#### Get Resource Data as JSON
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/data/json/
```

Streams the data directly as a JSON file for download.

#### Get Swagger Documentation
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/swagger/
```

Returns OpenAPI/Swagger documentation specific to this resource.

### Query Operators

The data endpoint can be queried with the following operators as query string (replacing `column_name` with the name of an actual column), if the column type allows it (see the swagger for each column's allowed parameters):

#### Filtering Operators
```
# exact
column_name__exact=value

# differs
column_name__differs=value

# is `null`
column_name__isnull

# is not `null`
column_name__isnotnull

# contains
column_name__contains=value

# does not contain (value does not contain)
column_name__notcontains=value

# in (value in list)
column_name__in=value1,value2,value3

# notin (value not in list)
column_name__notin=value1,value2,value3

# less
column_name__less=value

# greater
column_name__greater=value

# strictly less
column_name__strictly_less=value

# strictly greater
column_name__strictly_greater=value
```

#### Sorting
```
# sort by column
column_name__sort=asc
column_name__sort=desc
```

#### Aggregation Operators
> ⚠️ **WARNING**: Aggregation requests are only available for resources that are listed in the `ALLOW_AGGREGATION` list of the config file, which can be seen at the `/api/aggregation-exceptions/` endpoint, and on columns that have an index.

```
# group by values
column_name__groupby

# count values
column_name__count

# mean / average
column_name__avg

# minimum
column_name__min

# maximum
column_name__max

# sum
column_name__sum
```

> **Note**: Passing an aggregation operator (`count`, `avg`, `min`, `max`, `sum`) returns a column that is named `<column_name>__<operator>` (for instance: `?birth__groupby&score__sum` will return a list of dicts with the keys `birth` and `score__sum`).

> ⚠️ **WARNING**: columns that contain **JSON** objects (see the `profile` to know which ones do) **do not support filtering nor aggregation** for now, except `isnull` and `isnotnull`.

#### Pagination
```
page=1          # Page number (default: 1)
page_size=20    # Items per page (default: 20, max: 50)
```

#### Column Selection
```
columns=col1,col2,col3    # Select specific columns only
```

### Example Queries

#### Basic Filtering
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?score__greater=0.9&decompte__exact=13
```

**Returns:**
```json
{
  "data": [
    {
      "__id": 52,
      "id": " 5174f26d-d62b-4adb-a43a-c3b6288fa2f6",
      "score": 0.985,
      "decompte": 13,
      "is_true": false,
      "birth": "1980-03-23",
      "liste": "[0]"
    },
    {
      "__id": 543,
      "id": " 8705df7c-8a6a-49e2-9514-cf2fb532525e",
      "score": 0.955,
      "decompte": 13,
      "is_true": true,
      "birth": "1965-02-06",
      "liste": "[0, 1, 2]"
    }
  ],
  "links": {
    "profile": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/",
    "swagger": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/swagger/",
    "next": null,
    "prev": null
  },
  "meta": {
    "page": 1,
    "page_size": 20,
    "total": 2
  }
}
```

#### Aggregation with Filtering
With filters and aggregators (filtering is always done **before** aggregation, no matter the order in the parameters):
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?decompte__groupby&birth__less=1996&score__avg
```

i.e. `decompte` and average of `score` for all rows where `birth<="1996"`, grouped by `decompte`, returns:
```json
{
    "data": [
        {
            "decompte": 55,
            "score__avg": 0.7123333333333334
        },
        {
            "decompte": 27,
            "score__avg": 0.6068888888888889
        },
        {
            "decompte": 23,
            "score__avg": 0.4603333333333334
        },
        ...
    ]
}
```

#### Pagination
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?page=2&page_size=30
```

#### Column Selection
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?columns=id,score,birth
```

### Metrics API

The metrics service provides similar functionality for system metrics:

```shell
# Get metrics data
curl http://localhost:8006/api/{model}/data/

# Get metrics as CSV
curl http://localhost:8006/api/{model}/data/csv/
```

### Health Check

```shell
# Main API health
curl http://localhost:8005/health/

# Metrics API health
curl http://localhost:8006/health/
```

## ⚙️ Configuration

Configuration is handled through TOML files and environment variables. The default configuration is in `api_tabular/config_default.toml`.

### Key Configuration Options

| Option | Default | Description |
|--------|---------|-------------|
| `PGREST_ENDPOINT` | `http://localhost:8080` | PostgREST server URL |
| `SERVER_NAME` | `localhost:8005` | Server name for URL generation |
| `SCHEME` | `http` | URL scheme (http/https) |
| `SENTRY_DSN` | `None` | Sentry DSN for error reporting (optional) |
| `PAGE_SIZE_DEFAULT` | `20` | Default page size |
| `PAGE_SIZE_MAX` | `50` | Maximum allowed page size |
| `BATCH_SIZE` | `50000` | Batch size for streaming |
| `DOC_PATH` | `/api/doc` | Swagger documentation path |
| `ALLOW_AGGREGATION` | `["dddddddd-7777-eeee-8888-ffffffffffff", "aaaaaaaa-9999-bbbb-1010-cccccccccccc"]` | List of resource IDs allowed for aggregation |

### Environment Variables

You can override any configuration value using environment variables:

```shell
export PGREST_ENDPOINT="http://my-postgrest:8080"
export PAGE_SIZE_DEFAULT=50
export SENTRY_DSN="https://your-sentry-dsn"
```
Once the containers are up and running, you can directly query PostgREST on:
`<PGREST_ENDPOINT>/<table_name>?<filters>`
like for example:
`http://localhost:8080/eb7a008177131590c2f1a2ca0?decompte=eq.10`

### Custom Configuration File

Create a `config.toml` file in the project root or set the `CSVAPI_SETTINGS` environment variable:

```shell
export CSVAPI_SETTINGS="/path/to/your/config.toml"
```

## 🧪 Testing

This project uses [pytest](https://pytest.org/) for testing with async support and mocking capabilities. You must have the two test containers running for the tests to run (see [### 🧪 Run with a test database](#-run-with-a-test-database) for setup instructions).

### Running Tests

```shell
# Run all tests
uv run pytest

# Run specific test file
uv run pytest tests/test_api.py

# Run tests with verbose output
uv run pytest -v

# Run tests and show print statements
uv run pytest -s
```

### Tests Structure

- **`tests/test_api.py`** - API endpoint tests (actually pings the running API)
- **`tests/test_config.py`** - Configuration loading tests
- **`tests/test_query.py`** - Query building and processing tests
- **`tests/test_swagger.py`** - Swagger documentation tests (actually pings the running API)
- **`tests/test_utils.py`** - Utility function tests
- **`tests/conftest.py`** - Test fixtures and configuration

### CI/CD Testing

Tests are automatically run in CI/CD. See [`.circleci/config.yml`](.circleci/config.yml) for the complete CI/CD configuration.

## 🤝 Contributing

### 🧹 Code Linting and Formatting

This project follows PEP 8 style guidelines using [Ruff](https://astral.sh/ruff/) for linting and formatting. **Either running these commands manually or installing the pre-commit hook is required before submitting contributions.**

```shell
# Lint (including import sorting) and format code
uv run ruff check --fix && uv run ruff format
```

### 🔗 Pre-commit Hooks

This repository uses a [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) hook which lint and format code before each commit. **Installing the pre-commit hook is required for contributions.**

**Install pre-commit hooks:**
```shell
uv run pre-commit install
```
The pre-commit hook that automatically:
- Check YAML syntax
- Fix end-of-file issues
- Remove trailing whitespace
- Check for large files
- Run Ruff linting and formatting

### 🧪 Running Tests

**Pull requests cannot be merged unless all CI/CD tests pass.**
Tests are automatically run on every pull request and push to main branch. See [`.circleci/config.yml`](.circleci/config.yml) for the complete CI/CD configuration, and the [🧪 Testing](#-testing) section above for detailed testing commands.

### 🏷️ Releases and versioning

The release process uses the [`tag_version.sh`](tag_version.sh) script to create git tags, GitHub releases and update [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) automatically. Package version numbers are automatically derived from git tags using [setuptools_scm](https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm), so no manual version updates are needed in `pyproject.toml`.

**Prerequisites**: [GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/) must be installed and authenticated, and you must be on the main branch with a clean working directory.

```bash
# Create a new release
./tag_version.sh <version>

# Example
./tag_version.sh 2.5.0

# Dry run to see what would happen
./tag_version.sh 2.5.0 --dry-run
```

The script automatically:
- Extracts commits since the last tag and formats them for CHANGELOG.md
- Identifies breaking changes (commits with `!:` in the subject)
- Creates a git tag and pushes it to the remote repository
- Creates a GitHub release with the changelog content

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🆘 Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/datagouv/api-tabular/issues)
- **Discussion**: Use the discussion section at the end of the [production API page](https://www.data.gouv.fr/dataservices/api-tabulaire-data-gouv-fr-beta/)
- **Contact Form**: [Support form](https://support.data.gouv.fr/)

## 🌐 Production Resources

- **Production API**: [`https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api`](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api)
- **Product Documentation**: [API tabulaire data.gouv.fr (beta)](https://www.data.gouv.fr/dataservices/api-tabulaire-data-gouv-fr-beta/) (in French)
- **Technical Documentation**: [Swagger/OpenAPI docs](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api/doc)

Commit message:

feat: add ty type checker and fix type errors (#96)
Closes #95.

Add [ty](https://docs.astral.sh/ty/) type checker to api-tabular to
align with practices used in other backend stacks (e.g.
[udata](https://github.com/opendatateam/udata/pull/3670)). This PR
introduces it and resolves all reported type errors so that `ty check`
passes.

- Add `ty` to dev dependencies and document `uv run ty check` in the
README.
- Fix the 18 diagnostics reported by `ty check` across the codebase
(optional `None` handling, `process_total` signature and
`Content-Range`, return types, `OPERATORS_DESCRIPTIONS` narrowing, test
setup for `url_for` and config).
- Add a "Type check" step in the CircleCI lint job so type errors block
the pipeline on tagged builds.

README.md, after:

![Tabular API](banner.png)

# Tabular API

[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/datagouv/api-tabular.svg?style=svg)](https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/datagouv/api-tabular)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

An API service that provides RESTful access to CSV or tabular data converted by [Hydra](https://github.com/datagouv/hydra). This service provides a REST API to access PostgreSQL database tables containing CSV data, offering HTTP querying capabilities, pagination, and data streaming for CSV or tabular resources.

This service is mainly used, developed and maintained by [data.gouv.fr](https://data.gouv.fr) - the France Open Data platform.
The production API is deployed on data.gouv.fr infrastructure at [`https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api`](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api). See the [product documentation](https://www.data.gouv.fr/dataservices/api-tabulaire-data-gouv-fr-beta/) (in French) for usage details and the [technical documentation](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api/doc) for API reference.

## 🛠️ Installation & Setup

### 📋 Requirements

- **Python** >= 3.11, < 3.14
- **[uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)** for dependency management
- **Docker & Docker Compose**

### 🧪 Run with a test database

1. **Start the Infrastructure**

   Start the test CSV database and test PostgREST container:
   ```shell
   docker compose --profile test up -d
   ```
   The `--profile test` flag tells Docker Compose to start the PostgREST and PostgreSQL services for the test CSV database. This starts PostgREST on port 8080, connecting to the test CSV database. You can access the raw PostgREST API on http://localhost:8080.

2. **Launch the main API proxy**

   Install dependencies and start the proxy services:
   ```shell
   uv sync
   uv run adev runserver -p8005 api_tabular/tabular/app.py    # Api related to apified CSV files by udata-hydra (dev server)
   uv run adev runserver -p8006 api_tabular/metrics/app.py    # Api related to udata's metrics (dev server)
   ```

   **Note:** For production, use gunicorn with aiohttp worker:
   ```shell
   # Tabular API (port 8005)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.tabular.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8005 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -

   # Metrics API (port 8006)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.metrics.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8006 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -
   ```

   The main API provides a controlled layer over PostgREST - exposing PostgREST directly would be too permissive, so this adds a security and access control layer.

3. **Test the API**

   Query the API using a `resource_id`. Several test resources are available in the fake database:

   - **`aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc`** - Main test resource with 1000 rows
   - **`aaaaaaaa-5555-bbbb-6666-cccccccccccc`** - Resource with database indexes
   - **`dddddddd-7777-eeee-8888-ffffffffffff`** - Resource allowed for aggregation
   - **`aaaaaaaa-9999-bbbb-1010-cccccccccccc`** - Resource with indexes and aggregation allowed

### 🏭 Run with a real Hydra database

To use the API with a real database served by [Hydra](https://github.com/datagouv/hydra) instead of the fake test database:

1. **Start the real Hydra CSV database locally:**

   First, you need to have Hydra CSV database running locally. See the [Hydra repository](https://github.com/datagouv/hydra) for instructions on how to set it up. Make sure the Hydra CSV database is accessible on `localhost:5434`.

2. **Start PostgREST pointing to your local Hydra database:**
   ```shell
   docker compose --profile hydra up -d
   ```
   The `--profile hydra` flag tells Docker Compose to start the PostgREST service configured for a local real Hydra CSV database (instead of the test one provided by the docker compose in this repo). By default, this starts PostgREST on port 8080. You can customize the port using the `PGREST_PORT` environment variable:
   ```shell
   # Use default port 8080
   docker compose --profile hydra up -d

   # Use custom port (e.g., 8081)
   PGREST_PORT=8081 docker compose --profile hydra up -d
   ```

3. **Configure the API to use it:**
   ```shell
   # If using default port 8080
   export PGREST_ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8080"

   # If using custom port (e.g., 8081)
   export PGREST_ENDPOINT="http://localhost:8081"
   ```

4. **Start the API services:**
   ```shell
   uv sync
   uv run adev runserver -p8005 api_tabular/tabular/app.py     # Dev server
   uv run adev runserver -p8006 api_tabular/metrics/app.py     # Dev server
   ```

   **Note:** For production, use gunicorn with aiohttp worker:
   ```shell
   # Tabular API (port 8005)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.tabular.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8005 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -

   # Metrics API (port 8006)
   uv run gunicorn api_tabular.metrics.app:app_factory \
     --bind 0.0.0.0:8006 \
     --worker-class aiohttp.GunicornWebWorker \
     --workers 4 \
     --access-logfile -
   ```

5. **Use real resource IDs** from your Hydra database instead of the test IDs.

**Note:** Make sure your Hydra CSV database is accessible and the database schema matches the expected structure. The test database uses the `csvapi` schema, while real Hydra databases typically use the `public` schema.


## 📚 API Documentation

### Resource Endpoints

#### Get Resource Metadata
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/
```

Returns basic information about the resource including creation date, URL, and available endpoints.

**Example:**
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "created_at": "2023-04-21T22:54:22.043492+00:00",
  "url": "https://data.gouv.fr/datasets/example/resources/fake.csv",
  "links": [
    {
      "href": "/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/",
      "type": "GET",
      "rel": "profile"
    },
    {
      "href": "/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/",
      "type": "GET",
      "rel": "data"
    },
    {
      "href": "/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/swagger/",
      "type": "GET",
      "rel": "swagger"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Get Resource Profile
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/profile/
```

Returns the CSV profile information (column types, headers, etc.) generated by [csv-detective](https://github.com/datagouv/csv-detective).

**Example:**
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "profile": {
    "header": [
        "id",
        "score",
        "decompte",
        "is_true",
        "birth",
        "liste"
    ]
  },
  "...": "..."
}
```

#### Get Resource Data
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/data/
```

Returns the actual data with support for filtering, sorting, and pagination.

**Example:**
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/
```

**Response:**
```json
{
  "data": [
    {
        "__id": 1,
        "id": " 8c7a6452-9295-4db2-b692-34104574fded",
        "score": 0.708,
        "decompte": 90,
        "is_true": false,
        "birth": "1949-07-16",
        "liste": "[0]"
    },
    ...
  ],
  "links": {
      "profile": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/",
      "swagger": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/swagger/",
      "next": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?page=2&page_size=20",
      "prev": null
  },
  "meta": {
      "page": 1,
      "page_size": 20,
      "total": 1000
  }
}
```

#### Get Resource Data as CSV
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/data/csv/
```

Streams the data directly as a CSV file for download.

#### Get Resource Data as JSON
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/data/json/
```

Streams the data directly as a JSON file for download.

#### Get Swagger Documentation
```http
GET /api/resources/{resource_id}/swagger/
```

Returns OpenAPI/Swagger documentation specific to this resource.

### Query Operators

The data endpoint can be queried with the following operators as query string (replacing `column_name` with the name of an actual column), if the column type allows it (see the swagger for each column's allowed parameters):

#### Filtering Operators
```
# exact
column_name__exact=value

# differs
column_name__differs=value

# is `null`
column_name__isnull

# is not `null`
column_name__isnotnull

# contains
column_name__contains=value

# does not contain (value does not contain)
column_name__notcontains=value

# in (value in list)
column_name__in=value1,value2,value3

# notin (value not in list)
column_name__notin=value1,value2,value3

# less
column_name__less=value

# greater
column_name__greater=value

# strictly less
column_name__strictly_less=value

# strictly greater
column_name__strictly_greater=value
```

#### Sorting
```
# sort by column
column_name__sort=asc
column_name__sort=desc
```

#### Aggregation Operators
> ⚠️ **WARNING**: Aggregation requests are only available for resources that are listed in the `ALLOW_AGGREGATION` list of the config file, which can be seen at the `/api/aggregation-exceptions/` endpoint, and on columns that have an index.

```
# group by values
column_name__groupby

# count values
column_name__count

# mean / average
column_name__avg

# minimum
column_name__min

# maximum
column_name__max

# sum
column_name__sum
```

> **Note**: Passing an aggregation operator (`count`, `avg`, `min`, `max`, `sum`) returns a column that is named `<column_name>__<operator>` (for instance: `?birth__groupby&score__sum` will return a list of dicts with the keys `birth` and `score__sum`).

> ⚠️ **WARNING**: columns that contain **JSON** objects (see the `profile` to know which ones do) **do not support filtering nor aggregation** for now, except `isnull` and `isnotnull`.

#### Pagination
```
page=1          # Page number (default: 1)
page_size=20    # Items per page (default: 20, max: 50)
```

#### Column Selection
```
columns=col1,col2,col3    # Select specific columns only
```

### Example Queries

#### Basic Filtering
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?score__greater=0.9&decompte__exact=13
```

**Returns:**
```json
{
  "data": [
    {
      "__id": 52,
      "id": " 5174f26d-d62b-4adb-a43a-c3b6288fa2f6",
      "score": 0.985,
      "decompte": 13,
      "is_true": false,
      "birth": "1980-03-23",
      "liste": "[0]"
    },
    {
      "__id": 543,
      "id": " 8705df7c-8a6a-49e2-9514-cf2fb532525e",
      "score": 0.955,
      "decompte": 13,
      "is_true": true,
      "birth": "1965-02-06",
      "liste": "[0, 1, 2]"
    }
  ],
  "links": {
    "profile": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/profile/",
    "swagger": "http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/swagger/",
    "next": null,
    "prev": null
  },
  "meta": {
    "page": 1,
    "page_size": 20,
    "total": 2
  }
}
```

#### Aggregation with Filtering
With filters and aggregators (filtering is always done **before** aggregation, no matter the order in the parameters):
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?decompte__groupby&birth__less=1996&score__avg
```

i.e. `decompte` and average of `score` for all rows where `birth<="1996"`, grouped by `decompte`, returns:
```json
{
    "data": [
        {
            "decompte": 55,
            "score__avg": 0.7123333333333334
        },
        {
            "decompte": 27,
            "score__avg": 0.6068888888888889
        },
        {
            "decompte": 23,
            "score__avg": 0.4603333333333334
        },
        ...
    ]
}
```

#### Pagination
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?page=2&page_size=30
```

#### Column Selection
```shell
curl http://localhost:8005/api/resources/aaaaaaaa-1111-bbbb-2222-cccccccccccc/data/?columns=id,score,birth
```

### Metrics API

The metrics service provides similar functionality for system metrics:

```shell
# Get metrics data
curl http://localhost:8006/api/{model}/data/

# Get metrics as CSV
curl http://localhost:8006/api/{model}/data/csv/
```

### Health Check

```shell
# Main API health
curl http://localhost:8005/health/

# Metrics API health
curl http://localhost:8006/health/
```

## ⚙️ Configuration

Configuration is handled through TOML files and environment variables. The default configuration is in `api_tabular/config_default.toml`.

### Key Configuration Options

| Option | Default | Description |
|--------|---------|-------------|
| `PGREST_ENDPOINT` | `http://localhost:8080` | PostgREST server URL |
| `SERVER_NAME` | `localhost:8005` | Server name for URL generation |
| `SCHEME` | `http` | URL scheme (http/https) |
| `SENTRY_DSN` | `None` | Sentry DSN for error reporting (optional) |
| `PAGE_SIZE_DEFAULT` | `20` | Default page size |
| `PAGE_SIZE_MAX` | `50` | Maximum allowed page size |
| `BATCH_SIZE` | `50000` | Batch size for streaming |
| `DOC_PATH` | `/api/doc` | Swagger documentation path |
| `ALLOW_AGGREGATION` | `["dddddddd-7777-eeee-8888-ffffffffffff", "aaaaaaaa-9999-bbbb-1010-cccccccccccc"]` | List of resource IDs allowed for aggregation |

### Environment Variables

You can override any configuration value using environment variables:

```shell
export PGREST_ENDPOINT="http://my-postgrest:8080"
export PAGE_SIZE_DEFAULT=50
export SENTRY_DSN="https://your-sentry-dsn"
```
Once the containers are up and running, you can directly query PostgREST on:
`<PGREST_ENDPOINT>/<table_name>?<filters>`
like for example:
`http://localhost:8080/eb7a008177131590c2f1a2ca0?decompte=eq.10`

### Custom Configuration File

Create a `config.toml` file in the project root or set the `CSVAPI_SETTINGS` environment variable:

```shell
export CSVAPI_SETTINGS="/path/to/your/config.toml"
```

## 🧪 Testing

This project uses [pytest](https://pytest.org/) for testing with async support and mocking capabilities. You must have the two test containers running for the tests to run (see [### 🧪 Run with a test database](#-run-with-a-test-database) for setup instructions).

### Running Tests

```shell
# Run all tests
uv run pytest

# Run specific test file
uv run pytest tests/test_api.py

# Run tests with verbose output
uv run pytest -v

# Run tests and show print statements
uv run pytest -s
```

### Tests Structure

- **`tests/test_api.py`** - API endpoint tests (actually pings the running API)
- **`tests/test_config.py`** - Configuration loading tests
- **`tests/test_query.py`** - Query building and processing tests
- **`tests/test_swagger.py`** - Swagger documentation tests (actually pings the running API)
- **`tests/test_utils.py`** - Utility function tests
- **`tests/conftest.py`** - Test fixtures and configuration

### CI/CD Testing

Tests are automatically run in CI/CD. See [`.circleci/config.yml`](.circleci/config.yml) for the complete CI/CD configuration.

## 🤝 Contributing

### 🧹 Code Linting, Formatting and Type Checking

This project follows PEP 8 style guidelines using [Ruff](https://astral.sh/ruff/) for linting and formatting, and [ty](https://docs.astral.sh/ty/) for type checking. **Either running these commands manually or installing the pre-commit hook is required before submitting contributions.**

```shell
# Lint (including import sorting) and format code
uv run ruff check --fix && uv run ruff format

# Type check (ty)
uv run ty check
```

By default `ty check` checks the project root; pass paths to check specific files or directories. See the [ty CLI reference](https://docs.astral.sh/ty/reference/cli/) for options.

### 🔗 Pre-commit Hooks

This repository uses a [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) hook which lint and format code before each commit. **Installing the pre-commit hook is required for contributions.**

**Install pre-commit hooks:**
```shell
uv run pre-commit install
```
The pre-commit hook that automatically:
- Check YAML syntax
- Fix end-of-file issues
- Remove trailing whitespace
- Check for large files
- Run Ruff linting and formatting

### 🧪 Running Tests

**Pull requests cannot be merged unless all CI/CD tests pass.**
Tests are automatically run on every pull request and push to main branch. See [`.circleci/config.yml`](.circleci/config.yml) for the complete CI/CD configuration, and the [🧪 Testing](#-testing) section above for detailed testing commands.

### 🏷️ Releases and versioning

The release process uses the [`tag_version.sh`](tag_version.sh) script to create git tags, GitHub releases and update [CHANGELOG.md](CHANGELOG.md) automatically. Package version numbers are automatically derived from git tags using [setuptools_scm](https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm), so no manual version updates are needed in `pyproject.toml`.

**Prerequisites**: [GitHub CLI](https://cli.github.com/) must be installed and authenticated, and you must be on the main branch with a clean working directory.

```bash
# Create a new release
./tag_version.sh <version>

# Example
./tag_version.sh 2.5.0

# Dry run to see what would happen
./tag_version.sh 2.5.0 --dry-run
```

The script automatically:
- Extracts commits since the last tag and formats them for CHANGELOG.md
- Identifies breaking changes (commits with `!:` in the subject)
- Creates a git tag and pushes it to the remote repository
- Creates a GitHub release with the changelog content

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

## 🆘 Support

- **Issues**: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/datagouv/api-tabular/issues)
- **Discussion**: Use the discussion section at the end of the [production API page](https://www.data.gouv.fr/dataservices/api-tabulaire-data-gouv-fr-beta/)
- **Contact Form**: [Support form](https://support.data.gouv.fr/)

## 🌐 Production Resources

- **Production API**: [`https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api`](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api)
- **Product Documentation**: [API tabulaire data.gouv.fr (beta)](https://www.data.gouv.fr/dataservices/api-tabulaire-data-gouv-fr-beta/) (in French)
- **Technical Documentation**: [Swagger/OpenAPI docs](https://tabular-api.data.gouv.fr/api/doc)
